# Paginator

`class` Cake\\View\\Helper\\**PaginatorHelper**(View $view, array $config = [])

The PaginatorHelper is used to output pagination controls such as page numbers
and next/previous links.

See also [Pagination](../../controllers/pagination) for information on how to
create paginated datasets and do paginated queries.

## Setting the paginated resultset

`method` Cake\\View\\Helper\\PaginatorHelper::**setPaginated**($paginated, $options)

By default the helper uses the first instance of `Cake\Datasource\Paging\PaginatedInterface`
it finds in the view variables. (Generally the result of `Controller::paginate()`).

You can use `PaginatorHelper::setPaginated()` to explicitly set the paginated
resultset that the helper should use.

<a id="paginator-templates"></a>

### PaginatorHelper Templates

Internally PaginatorHelper uses a series of simple HTML templates to generate
markup. You can modify these templates to customize the HTML generated by the
PaginatorHelper.

Templates use `{{var}}` style placeholders. It is important to not add any
spaces around the `{{}}` or the replacements will not work.

## Loading Templates from a File

When adding the PaginatorHelper in your controller, you can define the
'templates' setting to define a template file to load. This allows you to
customize multiple templates and keep your code DRY:

``` php
// In your AppView.php
public function initialize(): void
{
    ...
    $this->loadHelper('Paginator', ['templates' => 'paginator-templates']);
}
```

This will load the file located at **config/paginator-templates.php**. See the
example below for how the file should look like. You can also load templates
from a plugin using `plugin syntax`:

``` php
// In your AppView.php
public function initialize(): void
{
    ...
    $this->loadHelper('Paginator', ['templates' => 'MyPlugin.paginator-templates']);
}
```

Whether your templates are in the primary application or a plugin, your
templates file should look something like:

``` text
return [
    'number' => '<a href="{{url}}">{{text}}</a>',
];
```

## Changing Templates at Run-time

`method` Cake\\View\\Helper\\PaginatorHelper::**setTemplates**($templates)

This method allows you to change the templates used by PaginatorHelper at
runtime. This can be useful when you want to customize templates for a
particular method call:

``` php
// Read the current template value.
$result = $this->Paginator->getTemplates('number');

// Change a template
$this->Paginator->setTemplates([
    'number' => '<em><a href="{{url}}">{{text}}</a></em>'
]);
```

> [!WARNING]
> Template strings containing a percentage sign (`%`) need special
> attention, you should prefix this character with another percentage so it
> looks like `%%`. The reason is that internally templates are compiled to
> be used with `sprintf()`.
> Example: '\<div style="width:{{size}}%%"\>{{content}}\</div\>'

## Template Names

PaginatorHelper uses the following templates:

- `nextActive` The active state for a link generated by next().
- `nextDisabled` The disabled state for next().
- `prevActive` The active state for a link generated by prev().
- `prevDisabled` The disabled state for prev()
- `counterRange` The template counter() uses when format == range.
- `counterPages` The template counter() uses when format == pages.
- `first` The template used for a link generated by first().
- `last` The template used for a link generated by last()
- `number` The template used for a link generated by numbers().
- `current` The template used for the current page.
- `ellipsis` The template used for ellipses generated by numbers().
- `sort` The template for a sort link with no direction.
- `sortAsc` The template for a sort link with an ascending direction.
- `sortDesc` The template for a sort link with a descending direction.

### Creating Sort Links

`method` Cake\\View\\Helper\\PaginatorHelper::**sort**($key, $title = null, $options = [])

Generates a sorting link. Sets querystring parameters for the sort and
direction. Links will default to sorting by asc. After the first click, links
generated with `sort()` will handle direction switching automatically. If the
resultset is sorted 'asc' by the specified key the returned link will sort by
'desc'. Uses the `sort`, `sortAsc`, `sortDesc`, `sortAscLocked` and
`sortDescLocked` templates.

Accepted keys for `$options`:

- `escape` Whether you want the contents HTML entity encoded, defaults to
  `true`.
- `direction` The default direction to use when this link isn't active.
- `lock` Lock direction. Will only use the default direction then, defaults to `false`.

Assuming you are paginating some posts, and are on page one:

``` php
echo $this->Paginator->sort('user_id');
```

Output:

``` html
<a href="/posts/index?page=1&amp;sort=user_id&amp;direction=asc">User Id</a>
```

You can use the title parameter to create custom text for your link:

``` php
echo $this->Paginator->sort('user_id', 'User account');
```

Output:

``` html
<a href="/posts/index?page=1&amp;sort=user_id&amp;direction=asc">User account</a>
```

If you are using HTML like images in your links remember to set escaping off:

``` php
echo $this->Paginator->sort(
  'user_id',
  '<em>User account</em>',
  ['escape' => false]
);
```

Output:

``` html
<a href="/posts/index?page=1&amp;sort=user_id&amp;direction=asc"><em>User account</em></a>
```

The direction option can be used to set the default direction for a link. Once a
link is active, it will automatically switch directions like normal:

``` php
echo $this->Paginator->sort('user_id', null, ['direction' => 'desc']);
```

Output:

``` html
<a href="/posts/index?page=1&amp;sort=user_id&amp;direction=desc">User Id</a>
```

The lock option can be used to lock sorting into the specified direction:

``` php
echo $this->Paginator->sort('user_id', null, ['direction' => 'asc', 'lock' => true]);
```

`method` Cake\\View\\Helper\\PaginatorHelper::**sortDir**(string $model = null, mixed $options = [])

`method` Cake\\View\\Helper\\PaginatorHelper::**sortKey**(string $model = null, mixed $options = [])

### Creating Page Number Links

`method` Cake\\View\\Helper\\PaginatorHelper::**numbers**($options = [])

Returns a set of numbers for the paged result set. Uses a modulus to
decide how many numbers to show on each side of the current page By default
8 links on either side of the current page will be created if those pages exist.
Links will not be generated for pages that do not exist. The current page is
also not a link. The `number`, `current` and `ellipsis` templates will be
used.

Supported options are:

- `before` Content to be inserted before the numbers.

- `after` Content to be inserted after the numbers.

- `modulus` how many numbers to include on either side of the current page,
  defaults to 8.

- `first` Whether you want first links generated, set to an integer to
  define the number of 'first' links to generate. Defaults to `false`. If a
  string is set a link to the first page will be generated with the value as the
  title:

  ``` php
  echo $this->Paginator->numbers(['first' => 'First page']);
  ```

- `last` Whether you want last links generated, set to an integer to define
  the number of 'last' links to generate. Defaults to `false`. Follows the same
  logic as the `first` option. There is a
  `~PaginatorHelper::last()` method to be used separately as well if
  you wish.

While this method allows a lot of customization for its output. It is
also ok to just call the method without any parameters. :

``` php
echo $this->Paginator->numbers();
```

Using the first and last options you can create links to the beginning
and end of the page set. The following would create a set of page links that
include links to the first 2 and last 2 pages in the paged results:

``` php
echo $this->Paginator->numbers(['first' => 2, 'last' => 2]);
```

### Creating Jump Links

In addition to generating links that go directly to specific page numbers,
you'll often want links that go to the previous and next links, first and last
pages in the paged data set.

`method` Cake\\View\\Helper\\PaginatorHelper::**prev**($title = '<< Previous', $options = [])

`method` Cake\\View\\Helper\\PaginatorHelper::**next**($title = 'Next >>', $options = [])

`method` Cake\\View\\Helper\\PaginatorHelper::**first**($first = '<< first', $options = [])

`method` Cake\\View\\Helper\\PaginatorHelper::**last**($last = 'last >>', $options = [])

### Creating Header Link Tags

PaginatorHelper can be used to create pagination link tags in your page
`<head>` elements:

``` php
// Create next/prev links for the current model.
echo $this->Paginator->meta();

// Create next/prev & first/last links for the current model.
echo $this->Paginator->meta(['first' => true, 'last' => true]);
```

### Checking the Pagination State

`method` Cake\\View\\Helper\\PaginatorHelper::**current**()

`method` Cake\\View\\Helper\\PaginatorHelper::**hasNext**(string $model = null)

`method` Cake\\View\\Helper\\PaginatorHelper::**hasPrev**()

`method` Cake\\View\\Helper\\PaginatorHelper::**hasPage**(int $page = 1)

`method` Cake\\View\\Helper\\PaginatorHelper::**total**()

### Creating a Page Counter

`method` Cake\\View\\Helper\\PaginatorHelper::**counter**(string $format = 'pages', array $options = [])

Returns a counter string for the paged result set. Using a provided format
string and a number of options you can create localized and application
specific indicators of where a user is in the paged data set. Uses the
`counterRange`, and `counterPages` templates.

Supported formats are 'range', 'pages' and custom. Defaults to pages which would
output like '1 of 10'. In the custom mode the supplied string is parsed and
tokens are replaced with actual values. The available tokens are:

- `{{page}}` - the current page displayed.
- `{{pages}}` - total number of pages.
- `{{current}}` - current number of records being shown.
- `{{count}}` - the total number of records in the result set.
- `{{start}}` - number of the first record being displayed.
- `{{end}}` - number of the last record being displayed.
- `{{model}}` - The pluralized human form of the model name.
  If your model was 'RecipePage', `{{model}}` would be 'recipe pages'.

You could also supply only a string to the counter method using the tokens
available. For example:

``` php
echo $this->Paginator->counter(
    'Page {{page}} of {{pages}}, showing {{current}} records out of
     {{count}} total, starting on record {{start}}, ending on {{end}}'
);
```

Setting 'format' to range would output like '1 - 3 of 13':

``` php
echo $this->Paginator->counter('range');
```

### Generating Pagination URLs

`method` Cake\\View\\Helper\\PaginatorHelper::**generateUrl**(array $options = [], ?string $model = null, array $url = [], array $urlOptions = [])

By default returns a full pagination URL string for use in non-standard contexts
(i.e. JavaScript). :

``` php
// Generates a URL similar to: /articles?sort=title&page=2
echo $this->Paginator->generateUrl(['sort' => 'title']);

// Generates a URL for a different model
echo $this->Paginator->generateUrl(['sort' => 'title'], 'Comments');

// Generates a URL to a different controller.
echo $this->Paginator->generateUrl(
    ['sort' => 'title'],
    null,
    ['controller' => 'Comments']
);
```

### Creating a Limit Selectbox Control

`method` Cake\\View\\Helper\\PaginatorHelper::**limitControl**(array $limits = [], $default = null, array $options = [])

Create a dropdown control that changes the `limit` query parameter:

``` php
// Use the defaults.
echo $this->Paginator->limitControl();

// Define which limit options you want.
echo $this->Paginator->limitControl([25 => 25, 50 => 50]);

// Custom limits and set the selected option
echo $this->Paginator->limitControl([25 => 25, 50 => 50], $user->perPage);
```

The generated form and control will automatically submit on change.

## Automatic Limit Generation with Steps

Instead of manually defining limit options, you can use the `steps` option to
automatically generate limits in multiples of a specific value:

``` php
// Generate limits in steps of 10 up to maxLimit
echo $this->Paginator->limitControl([], null, ['steps' => 10]);
// With maxLimit of 50, this generates: 10, 20, 30, 40, 50

// Steps of 25 up to maxLimit or 100 (whichever is lower)
echo $this->Paginator->limitControl([], null, ['steps' => 25]);
```

When using `steps`, you cannot also provide explicit limits in the `$limits`
parameter - you must use one or the other.

## Respecting maxLimit

The `limitControl()` method automatically respects the `maxLimit` configuration
from your paginator settings. Any limit options that exceed the `maxLimit` will
be automatically filtered out:

``` php
// In your controller with maxLimit of 50
$this->paginate = [
    'limit' => 20,
    'maxLimit' => 50,
];

// In your template - limits above 50 are filtered out
echo $this->Paginator->limitControl([20 => 20, 50 => 50, 100 => 100]);
// Only shows: 20, 50
```

If all default or provided limits exceed the `maxLimit`, the control will
automatically use the `maxLimit` value as the only available option.

### Configuring Pagination Options

`method` Cake\\View\\Helper\\PaginatorHelper::**options**($options = [])

Sets all the options for the PaginatorHelper. Supported options are:

- `url` The URL of the paginating action.

  The option allows your to set/override any element for URLs generated by
  the helper:

  ``` php
  $this->Paginator->options([
      'url' => [
          'lang' => 'en',
          '?' => [
              'sort' => 'email',
              'direction' => 'desc',
              'page' => 6,
          ],
      ]
  ]);
  ```

  The example above adds the `en` route parameter to all links the helper will
  generate. It will also create links with specific sort, direction and page
  values. By default `PaginatorHelper` will merge in all of the current passed
  arguments and query string parameters.

- `escape` Defines if the title field for links should be HTML escaped.
  Defaults to `true`.

### Example Usage

It's up to you to decide how to show records to the user, but most often this
will be done inside HTML tables. The examples below assume a tabular layout, but
the PaginatorHelper available in views doesn't always need to be restricted as
such.

See the details on
[PaginatorHelper](https://api.cakephp.org/5.x/class-Cake.View.Helper.PaginatorHelper.html) in
the API. As mentioned, the PaginatorHelper also offers sorting features which
can be integrated into your table column headers:

``` php
<!-- templates/Posts/index.php -->
<table>
    <tr>
        <th><?= $this->Paginator->sort('id', 'ID') ?></th>
        <th><?= $this->Paginator->sort('title', 'Title') ?></th>
    </tr>
       <?php foreach ($recipes as $recipe): ?>
    <tr>
        <td><?= $recipe->id ?> </td>
        <td><?= h($recipe->title) ?> </td>
    </tr>
    <?php endforeach; ?>
</table>
```

The links output from the `sort()` method of the `PaginatorHelper` allow
users to click on table headers to toggle the sorting of the data by a given
field.

It is also possible to sort a column based on associations:

``` php
<table>
    <tr>
        <th><?= $this->Paginator->sort('title', 'Title') ?></th>
        <th><?= $this->Paginator->sort('Authors.name', 'Author') ?></th>
    </tr>
       <?php foreach ($recipes as $recipe): ?>
    <tr>
        <td><?= h($recipe->title) ?> </td>
        <td><?= h($recipe->name) ?> </td>
    </tr>
    <?php endforeach; ?>
</table>
```

> [!NOTE]
> Sorting by columns in associated models requires setting these in the
> `PaginationComponent::paginate` property. Using the example above, the
> controller handling the pagination would need to set its `sortableFields`
> key as follows:
>
> ``` php
> $this->paginate = [
>     'sortableFields' => [
>         'Posts.title',
>         'Authors.name',
>     ],
> ];
> ```
>
> For more information on using the `sortableFields` option, please see
> [Control Which Fields Used For Ordering](#control-which-fields-used-for-ordering).

The final ingredient to pagination display in views is the addition of page
navigation, also supplied by the PaginationHelper:

``` php
// Shows the page numbers
<?= $this->Paginator->numbers() ?>

// Shows the next and previous links
<?= $this->Paginator->prev('« Previous') ?>
<?= $this->Paginator->next('Next »') ?>

// Prints X of Y, where X is current page and Y is number of pages
<?= $this->Paginator->counter() ?>
```

The wording output by the counter() method can also be customized using special
markers:

``` php
<?= $this->Paginator->counter(
    'Page {{page}} of {{pages}}, showing {{current}} records out of
    {{count}} total, starting on record {{start}}, ending on {{end}}'
) ?>
```

<a id="paginator-helper-multiple"></a>

### Paginating Multiple Results

If you are [paginating multiple queries](#paginating-multiple-queries)
you'll need to use `PaginatorHelper::setPaginated()` first before calling
other methods of the helper, so that they generate expected output.

`PaginatorHelper` will automatically use the `scope` defined in when the
query was paginated. To set additional URL parameters for multiple pagination
you can include the scope names in `options()`:

``` php
$this->Paginator->options([
    'url' => [
        // Additional URL parameters for the 'articles' scope
        'articles' => [
            '?' => ['articles' => 'yes']
        ],
        // Additional URL parameters for the 'comments' scope
        'comments' => [
            'articleId' => 1234,
        ],
    ],
]);
```
